1. **Jean-Philippe Cointet**
	Sciences Po médialab, where he designs innovative computational sociology methods. He is specialized in text analysis, and is working on various kinds of corpora and sources questioning their socio-political dynamics. His research areas are diverse, ranging from social media analysis (Facebook public posts and comments) to science of science (data turn in oncology)or political processes mapping (political discourses, international negotiations) and frame analysis (press coverage of migration processes).
2. **Maxime Crépel**
	Sociologist and research engineer at the Sciences Po médialab. His research focuses on the uses of digital technology. He has participated in several study projects related to the use of social networks and user generated content services, ebook and mobile phone uses, as well as issues related to digital identities, AI and algorithms.
3. **Achim Edelmann**
	Specializes in the sociology of culture, social networks, and computational methods. His work focuses on the structure-culture link in sociology and on the co-evolution of scientific ideas and public debates. This includes projects on the interaction between cultural meanings and social networks, scientists' public support of risky science, the semantic and narrative meanings in interviews, and the spread of misinformation across private messaging services. In his work, he increasingly collects and analyzes new forms of large-scale data using relational databases and cloud computing.
4. **Jen Schradie**
	Research interests cover several social aspects of information and communication technologies: digital divide, social activism, digital workers, etc. From a sociological perspective, her research findings challenge utopian visions of digital democracy or dystopian visions of the harms of the Internet. She notes that unequal social structures, bureaucratic institutions, and political ideology are factors influencing Internet use. Her research is at the intersection of social stratification and inequality, communication and technology, protest movements, and political sociology. She is currently conducting a comparative study on the role of gender and social origin in the start-up economy in France and the United States, and is also analyzing anti-Muslim discourse on social networks. By integrating qualitative and quantitative methods, "on" and "off" line data, it puts into perspective the disparities and variations in participation in digital society.